---
layout: post
title: "DNS tips and tricks"
tags: ubuntu 24.04 openwrt
permalink: /pages/dns.html
image: /data/img/wide/tab.jpg
---

`ping`, `ssh` or your favorite web browser may not resolve host names in the
same way, sometimes producing strange results.

Standard tools (ping, telnet, wget, curl, ...) obey "Name Service Switch" configured in (`/etc/nsswitch.conf`). On my machine, the line about hosts reads:

```bash
cat /etc/nsswitch.conf | grep hosts
hosts:          files mdns4_minimal [NOTFOUND=return] dns
```

So host name resolution will be:
  * Use local files (`/etc/hotsts`)
  * Then [mDNS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multicast_DNS){:.external} but only for  host names ending in `.local`.
  * Then DNS server (from `/etc/resolv.conf`) (only for host names not ending in `.local`)

This file may also use LDAP or NIS for host name resolution.

## `/etc/hosts`

Here is the [/etc/hosts documentation](https://linux.die.net/man/5/hosts){:.external}.

:point_up: You may experience problems if `localhost` and the local machine host name is not defined in that file.

## mDNS
mDNS, (Linux: Avahi, Apple: Bonjour) is used by local machine to announce there
services. You may have to install `umdns` on OpenWRT.

## DNS (and `/etc/resolv.conf`)
 * Most modern Linux distributions uses systemd-resolve and/or NetworkManager, so
   /etc/resolve.conf contains `127.0.0.1` as nameserver.

   `resolvectl status` will show how host name are resolved.


## Web browsers
Web browsers uses DNS caching and modifying `/etc/hosts` won't affect name resolution unless the cache is cleared by a restart or an action.
  * Firefox : Open [about:networking#dns](about:networking#dns) and click on "Clear DNS cache".
  * Chrome : Open [chrome://net-internals/#dns](chrome://net-internals/#dns) and click on "Clear host cache"
